---
layout: post
title: "Should Apple Spin Off Its Pro Apps Division?"
date: 2012-01-31 14:30
comments: true
categories:
- Apple
- Final Cut Pro
---

Today, Apple released [Final Cut Pro X 10.0.3](http://www.apple.com/finalcutpro/) with a lengthy list of long-overdue features.  If they were being honest, the version number would be 10.1.  For some reason they're insisting on pretending this is a maintenance release.  Perhaps remarkably, this release has a five star rating on the App Store so far (with the average for the previous three versions around two-and-a-half stars).  I can't fairly judge myself since I generally don't need multicam editing and I haven't got a broadcast monitor handy, nor am I particularly familiar with FCPX.  I have done one small project and I found myself getting rather frustrated with it.

It may be intuitive from the perspective of a user unfamiliar with existing editing software (except perhaps iMovie), but as someone who has edited professionally with Final Cut Pro since version 3, it's a truly brain-twisting experience at first.  Still, a lot of the interface issues that FCPX attempts to address have also been frustrating me to no end since version 3, so I haven't written it off yet.  I just have been too busy programming to really sit down and figure it out.

All that aside, Final Cut Pro has never been an ideal product for professional use.  Not because of the quality of the software - I think it was truly superior to the obsolete crap Avid was trying to sell us until recently - but because Apple treats its professional customers the same way it does its consumer-level customers.  Everything is a deep dark secret.  No great effort is expended on backwards compatibility between minor maintenance releases (and OS releases break things); there isn't a lot of transparency about what community input has been taken to heart and no public back and forth.  I've had a few of my suggestion-box comments implemented, but not always to my satisfaction.  A community forum would have helped.

Apple hasn't been taking full advantage of its integration.  One of my suggestion box ideas that I still hold dear is for Final Cut Pro to override the System Updater automatically and not automatically install Mac OS X updates until they have been tested with Final Cut and any issues patched in Final Cut as well.  Yes you can just never update your computer; I've seen a lot of shops do that.  That, however, leaves you with a lot of mismatched systems on the same network sharing files (assuming you didn't set up all your systems at the same time).  It's really asking for trouble.

I also wanted the updater to have access to some sort of database of "tested configurations".  Rather than Apple having to sell turnkey editing solutions like Avid was (but seems to have retreated from since), they could just test the software on a variety of custom configurations, and brave customers or hardware vendors could test their own configurations and upload the results to the database with known issues.  Hopefully then the updater would offer you a package update specifically for your configuration, with a list of known issues.

If that's a little pie-in-the-sky, at least an official community bug tracker would be great for reporting (and checking for) hardware and software plugin compatibility issues.  I don't think Apple's support communities site is doing the job, because there has been an historical tendency for Apple to simply ignore or delete issues from the site.  You have no way of knowing if Apple heard you and is addressing the problem.

Final Cut Pro 10.0.0 should have been a Public Beta release.  Apparently, 10.0.3 should have been the full release.  (It reminds me a bit of when Apple launched Mac OS X 10.0 and it was useless.  We had to go back to OS 9 and wait for 10.1 before we could get any work done.) If something is going to be End of Life'd, people shouldn't have to wait 3 years to find out for sure (Shake). Professional apps should be developed with the collaboration of the professionals who depend on them for their livelihoods. But this kind of transparency is incompatible with Apple's culture of secrecy.

Apple's Pro apps will always be popular, because Apple is subsidizing them and the price is ridiculously inexpensive compared to their rivals with similar capability.  However, it's easy to understand why this experience with Final Cut Pro X has led a lot of professionals to drop Final Cut in favor of Avid or Premiere.  After all, if you have to relearn the software anyway, why not go with a company that is more open about its plans?  Therefore I see two ways forward for Apple: either drop the secrecy act (just for Pro Apps) or spin off Logic, Final Cut Pro, Motion and Aperture into a different company, the way they did with Filemaker.

Either of these options would be a win for paid professionals.  But if Apple spins off the apps, it will be bad for students and hobbyists because their prices would almost certainly rise to meet development costs.  On the other hand, it would probably help protect competition in the industry by putting Avid and Adobe on a more equal footing with Apple pricewise, which is a win for the film and music industries.  Apple will probably see only a minor difference in sales no matter what they do - as long as they keep the apps in house - since students and hobbyists probably make up the majority of licensees already (and thus the elimination of FCP and Logic Express; people were skipping over them to get the 'real thing').

I think that it is in Apple's best interest to keep their pro users happy, though.  It will encourage students to use their software and buy their hardware.  If I was in charge over there, I would work on opening up the Pro Apps division to its user base and treating them like partners.  Low prices will help hold off the competition, even if they get a better view of what's going on at Apple.  I don't think I would want to spin off the Pro Apps, because it would make it difficult to share technology with the iLife suite and the pricing advantage would be hard to maintain.